I am profoundly grateful to my supervisor Luke Ong for his patience, availability and encouragement throughout my DPhil. He is possibly the best supervisor a student could dream of. I also thank him for allocating me a 3-year studentship which allowed me to pursue my studies without financial concerns.

Further financial support was provided by a 6-month research assistantship through the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh. I express my gratitude to Colin Stirling, Monika Lekuse, Margaret Davis and Julian Bradfield for setting up and offering me this position.

%I express my gratitude to Colin Stirling, Monika Lekuse, Margaret Davis and Julian Bradfield from the School of Informatics at the University of Edinburgh who set up and offered me a 6-month research assistant position, undertaken during the last year of my doctoral program.

I am thankful to my examiners Samson Abramsky and Guy McCusker for their careful reading and insightful comments which helped in improving the quality of this thesis.

My thanks also go to the members of the Oxford Computing Laboratory with whom I have interacted during the course of my studies, in particular to Andrzej Muraswki, Samson Abramsky, Matthew Hague, Damien Sereni, Jolie de Miranda, Sam Sanjabi, Nikos Tzevelekos, Hristina Palikareva and Christopher Broadbent. I also acknowledge Ugo dal Lago for insightful discussions we had during his visit to Oxford in March 2008.

In my last year I had a lot of fun playing football with people from the laboratory; I thank all the regular players, especially Ben Worrell, Jo\"el Ouaknine and Michael Benedikt.

My friends also need to be acknowledged for making my stay in the UK so enjoyable: Ludovic, Maki, Sascha, Ross, Julien, Alex, Mathieu, Doroth\'ee and Yunjeong. Special thanks to Sascha Kuzin for reporting typos from a preliminary draft of the thesis.

Finally I express warm thanks to my parents, brothers and close family who have supported me throughout the years, especially to my adorable partner Lily (\begin{CJK*}{GB}{gbsn}\CJKtilde ¡÷«≥∫Æ \end{CJK*}).
