We consider a syntactic restriction for higher-order grammars called \emph{safety}  that  constrains occurrences of variables in the production rules according to their type-theoretic order. We transpose and generalize this restriction to the setting of the simply-typed lambda calculus, giving us what we call the \emph{safe lambda calculus}.  We study the expressivity of the calculus and obtain a result in the same vein as Schwichtenberg's 1976 characterization of the simply-typed lambda calculus: we show that the numeric functions representable in the safe lambda calculus are exactly the multivariate polynomials; thus conditional is not definable. We
also give a characterization of representable word functions.
We then study the complexity of deciding beta-eta equality of two safe simply-typed terms and show that this problem is PSPACE-hard. The safety restriction is then extended to other applied lambda calculi featuring recursion and references such as PCF and Idealized Algol (IA for short).

We then look at Game Semantics. We introduce a new concrete presentation of this semantics using the theory of \emph{traversals}. It is shown that the \emph{revealed game denotation} of a term can be computed by traversing some souped-up version of the term's abstract syntax tree using adequately defined traversal rules.
This result was presented at the Galop workshop at ETAPS 2008.
Based on this presentation and via syntactic reasoning we obtain a game-semantic interpretation of safety: the strategy denotations of safe lambda-terms verify the property of \emph{P-incremental justification}. This result was presented at the TLCA conference in 2007.

Next we study models of the safe lambda calculus and show that these are captured by  \emph{Incremental Closed Categories}. We build a categorical game model of the safe lambda calculus which gives rise to a fully abstract game model of safe IA.
The model obtained for safe IA is effectively presentable: two terms are equivalent just if they have the same set of complete \emph{O-incrementally justified} plays, where O-incremental justification is defined as the dual of P-incremental justification.

Finally in the last chapter we study safety from the point of view of algorithmic game semantics.  We observe that up to the $3^{rd}$ order, the addition of unsafe context is conservative for observational equivalence (for both IA and safe IA). This implies that all the upper complexity bounds known for the lower-order fragments of IA also hold for the safe fragment; we show that it is also the case for the known lower-bounds. At order $4$, observational equivalence was shown to be undecidable for IA.
We conjecture that for the order-$4$ \emph{safe} fragment of IA, the problem is reducible to the DPDA-equivalence problem (which is decidable).
