I am profoundly grateful to Professor Luke Ong for his patience, availability and encouragement throughout the years. He is possibly the best supervisor a DPhil student could dream of. I also thank him for allocating me a 3-year EPSRC studentship which allowed me to pursue my studies without financial concerns.

I am grateful to the people from the the School of Informatics at the University of Edinburgh who set up and offered me a 6-month research assistant position, undertaken during my last year, which allowed me to pursue further the research presented in my thesis. In particular I thank Colin Stirling, Monika Lekuse, Margaret Davis, and ???.
%% shall i thank the other guy met at BCTCS2008 in Durham?
 
My thanks also go to the members of the Oxford Computing Laboratory with whom I have interacted during the course of my studies, in particular to Andrzej Muraswki, Matthew Hague, Damien Sereni, Jolie de Miranda, Mathieu Verbaere, Nikos Tzevelekos, Christopher Broadbent. I also acknowledge Ugo dal Lago for insightful discussions we had during his visit to Oxford in March 2008. I had a lot of fun playing football with people from the laboratory during my last year; I thank all the regular players, especially Ben Worrell and Jo\"el Ouaknine.

-My examiners Professor Samson Abramski and Professor Guy McCusker

The English prose that follows would have been even harder to read if Sascha Kuzin had not help me to eliminate typos.

On a more personal side I would like to acknowledge my girlfriend (and common-law partner) Lily 
(\begin{CJK*}{GB}{gbsn}\CJKtilde ¡÷«≥∫Æ \end{CJK*}) for her constant support throughout the years.
 My gratitude also goes to my friends for making my stay in the UK enjoyable, particularly to Sascha, Ayako, Maki, Ross, Ludovic, Mathieu and Doroth\'ee.

Finally I am deeply grateful to my family: my parents Bianca and Dominique, my grandmother Anita, my aunt Ginette, my brothers Eric and Gwen.

I dedicate this thesis to the memory of my grandfather Luigi Bombardier.