\input{galop08.pre}


\title{A tool illustrating the Path-Traversal Correspondence
\\ GALOP 2008}

\author{William~Blum~~~~~~~~~~~C.-H.~Luke~Ong\\
Oxford University Computing Laboratory\\
Wolfson Building, Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QD, ENGLAND\\
\{william.blum,luke.ong\}@comlab.ox.ac.uk }



\begin{document}
\maketitle \thispagestyle{empty}

\begin{abstract}
Todo...
\end{abstract}


\section{Luke's description of the paper:}

 We have developed a number of what we call Path-Traversal
Correspondence Theorems. One way to think of the work is as a kind
of representation theory of the game semantics of higher-type
programs (such as recursion schemes, PCF and Idealized Algol) that
is very concrete, involving combinatorics over (possibly) infinite
structures defined by the abstract syntax trees of the programs
being modelled. The idea is that we represent a play in the
strategy-denotation of a term as the underlying "hereditarily
uncovered" interaction sequence, called traversal. Another way to
put it is that traversals are built up by performing
parallel-composition but WITHOUT the hiding. This is what William
Greenland has called (in his thesis) "revealed semantics" (or
"interaction semantics"). A consequence of the representation is
that we show how the "innocent game" given by a term can be played
out very concretely over what is in essence the abstract syntax tree
of the term itself.

This "representation theory" was first developed to prove the result
in my LICS06 paper (i.e. trees generated by higher-order recursion
schemes have decidable MSO theories). The theory has at least two
other applications. First as a justification of the game
characterization of the Higher-Order Matching Problem (but NOT the
algorithm) developed by Colin Stirling, and secondly as a key lemma
underpinning the result that
 the following are equivalent (i.e. equi-expressive:
i. order-n recursion schemes (= order-n PCF terms generated from
uninterpreted order-1 symbols) ii. order-n collapsible pushdown
automata CPDA. iii. order-n "pure" innocent strategies

What we are thinking of submitting is a short paper describing a
tool developed by William Blum that illustrates the representation
theory. The tool has many capabilities. For example, it can perform
the inter-translation between CPDA and recursion schemes; it can
demonstrate the path-traversal correspondence in the form of a
2-player game (and lets users play it out over the abstract syntax
tree of the term); and it is a very impressive tool for drawing
justified sequences!

What we intend to talk about in the paper is first an overview of
the correspondence theorems, illustrate their many applications, and
then showcase the tool. Please let us know what you think.


\input{../lmcs/corresp_overview}

\end{document}
