I am profoundly grateful to Luke Ong for his patience, availability and encouragement throughout the years. He is possibly the best supervisor a DPhil student could dream of. I also thank him for allocating me a 3-year studentship which allowed me to pursue my studies without financial concerns.

I express my gratitude to the people from the School of Informatics at the University of Edinburgh who set up and offered me a 6-month research assistant position, undertaken during my last year, which allowed me to pursue further the research presented in this thesis. In particular I thank Colin Stirling, Monika Lekuse, Margaret Davis, and Julian Bradfield.

My thanks also go to the members of the Oxford Computing Laboratory with whom I have interacted during the course of my studies, in particular to Andrzej Muraswki, Samson Abramski, Matthew Hague, Damien Sereni, Jolie de Miranda, Sam Sanjabi, Mathieu Verbaere, Nikos Tzevelekos, Christopher Broadbent. I also acknowledge Ugo dal Lago for insightful discussions we had during his visit to Oxford in March 2008. In my last year I had a lot of fun playing football with people from the laboratory; I thank all the regular players, especially Ben Worrell and Jo\"el Ouaknine.

Samson Abramski and Guy McCusker agreed to be my examiners. I thank them for their careful reading of the thesis and insightful comments which contributed to improving the quality of this thesis.

My gratitude also goes to my friends for making my stay in the UK enjoyable, particularly to Ludovic, Maki, Sascha, Ross, Alex, Doroth\'ee and Yunjeong. Many special thanks to Sascha Kuzin who helped me eliminate many typos from
the English technical prose that follows.

Finally I am deeply grateful to everyone who has supported me throughout the years, especially to my adorable girlfriend (and common-law partner) Lily (\begin{CJK*}{GB}{gbsn}\CJKtilde ¡÷«≥∫Æ \end{CJK*}), my parents Bianca and Dominique, my grandmother Anita, my aunt Ginette, my grandfather Andr\'e and my brothers \'Eric and Gwen.

%% Moved to the dedication page:
%I dedicate this thesis to the memory of my grandfather Luigi Bombardier.
